% Mixture modelling is widely  used  in  clustering  applications.   We  focus  on
% mixtures of directional data that are distributed on  a  sphere.   The  analogue
% of Normal distribution is von Mises  Fisher  (VMF)  distribution  on  a  sphere.
% We use Minimum Message Length (MML) paradigm of Bayesian inference to infer  the
% number of components and the parameters that correspond to a mixture model where
% each component is a VMF distribution.  We demonstrate its effectiveness by using
% these  models  to   delineate   secondary   structural   elements   in   protein
% structures.  The three dimensional geometry of  protein  structures  allows  for
% grouping of torsion angles between the successive protein coordinates.   Mixture
% modelling of these directional data allows for segregating  data  with  specific
% properties.   Each  of  the  secondary  structural  elements  exhibit   specific
% geometric interactions and this can  be  leveraged  to  build  a  mixture  model
% for each kind of interatomic behaviour.  Each of  the  mixture  model  can  help
% represent a secondary structural element.  Using these  statistical  models,  we
% assign  secondary  structure  to  a  stretch  of  residues  within  a   protein.

Over the past 3 decades, statistics of directional data has received tremendous attention 
for its application to data mining problems that arise in a wide variety of fields, 
 especially life sciences and medicine. This paper reports on inferring from directional data
mixtures of von Mises-Fisher (vMF) distributions and their corresponding 
parameters, using the information-theoretic criterion of Minimum Message Length (MML). 
vMF is a fundamental probability distribution useful to many statistical inference problems on directional data 
distributed on the surface of an arbitrary dimensional sphere. 
We apply our MML approach on directional data corresponding to the C$_\alpha$ coordinates derived from a large,  
non-redundant collection of experimentally determined three-dimensional structures of protein biomolecules.
We thus infer a mixture model describing the empirical distribution of C$\_alpha$ coordinates of proteins.
This mixture model is useful in addressing a number of computational problems involving protein structures. 
Its effectiveness is demonstrated here on the problem of delineating any  given protein structure into 
non-overlapping regions and classifying them into secondary structural groups -- helices of various kinds, 
strands of sheet, and coil.  We further use our inferred mixture model to sample random protein conformations.
